## Entry 2 - Jan 23rd 2014 
###New code style tendencies
---

Haxe is an intoxicating language. Having been weaned on Java and ActionScript3, two strict (some might even call them curmudgeonly) languages that probably taught me the most of modern (at least relatively modern) programming techniques, and having had the fear of God set into me by years of comparatively anarchistic JavaScript/AS1, Haxe is a deeply alluring balance of freedom and control. This has firmly shaped my code style the past year or so.

#### 1: Type inference for cleaner code

Philosophically, I am *firmly* in the camp of strong typing, but I've come to the realization I'm more concerned with having an even conversation with the compiler than I am with myself.
 
But the following bit of AS3 drives me, for lack of better words, up the fucking walls.

	var list:Vector.<Int> = new Vector.<Int>();

This line of code highlights a core issue with AS3 that, in my opinion, makes it a flat out poor language. In Java you have no var keyword because type is always required by the declaration, so var is a completely empty statement. Transmuting the AS3, you'd have something this.

	 Vector.<Int> list = new Vector.<Int>();

So now we've eliminated one word, but still there's that god damn repetition! Why am I writing Vector.<Int> twice in the same context? You'd have to be some sort of mad animal to not infer the type of list.

I find that type declarations paired with object instantiation simply do not make sense together, from the perspective of the code as a written narrative.

	To get the coffee, I picked up the coffee

Thus we return to the var keyword. To me, paired with *type inference*, the var keyword is a contextualization of the statement that is yet to come. It simply means, "here is a variable of a type that will be made clear".

	var list = new Vector<Int>();

My *god* the relief. Every single word in that *sentence* has a natural place, and it reads naturally left to right. And with Haxe's type inference, I have full code completion and type safety to boot. It is, in a word, *glorious*.

And so, the past year, I find myself increasingly liberal with type inference, and embracing that "magic" var keyword for its place in the natural writing of code. This has some caveats. And as such I've made a basic rule for myself:

##### Only use type inference when it results in cleaner code

The signature of a method is key to its understanding as part of the narrative. I use type inference to remove unnecessary information, I do not use it to obscure the relevant.

	//I always explicitly type function signatures 
	public function foo(myFloat:Float, myName:String):Void{
		//I infer when there is no ambiguity...
		var someIntArray = new Array<Int>(); 
		//..and I don't when there is.
		var someFloat:Float = 1;
		var someInt:Int = 1;
	}

Furthermore, this attention to cleaning up the *reading context* allows me to actually, *filthily*, employ Haxe anonymous functions much more liberally than I could or would even consider doing in the past. 

	addEventListener(MouseEvent.MOUSE_DOWN, function(e){ //do stuff});

This is a moderately filthy example, but the anonymous block reads so easily while remaining type safe I feel no harm has been done to the readability, as opposed to:

	addEventListener(MouseEvent.MOUSE_DOWN, function(e:MouseEvent):Void { //do stuff });

#### 2: Too many gosh darn words!

The moment you start looking at necessary words like this, is the moment you start really noticing repetition. I grew to consider the number of keystrokes I spend in a given day, and how many of them I spend writing unnecessary nonsense. I think one of the most important things any tool can offer is a set of *good defaults*, and programming languages are no different.

AS3 has four levels of access control. Public, Private, Protected and Internal. The default is Internal. I have written AS3 since it came about, and I still don't fully understand the purpose of Internal over Private. I look back at learning Java and AS3, and I keep coming back to the feeling that, man, that's a lot of red tape to describe ideas that are largely identical.

Haxe defaults to Private, which in Haxe terms behaves like AS3's Protected. Beyond that, there is only Public.

My *god* the relief. Here is a whole *suite* of words I conceivably never have to write again. It's taken me some good getting used to, but finally I've stopped writing Private altogether. The only access control I ever have to manually incur is Public. 

This made me keenly aware of the difference between the two. Paired with function inlining, there is essentially no reason for me not to write the most floweringly verbose and narrative classes in town, because the only times I have to genuinely worry about what I am presenting as an API is oh-so-clearly denominated by the public keyword.

Haxe has this beautiful mean streak of elimination running right through it. The elimination of break statements from switches, for instance, felt like a robbery at first: You mean I can't have cases that cascade onto one another anymore?! Turns out you don't need those, guy. One less word to write! Next?

For loops. Ye gods, look at this.

	for(var i:Int = 0; i < someValue; i++){
	}   

Haxe reckons you should stop that nonsense. It reckons you should concentrate on the task that is required, rather than give you this rambling structure that opens for a lot of showboating but generally very little real benefit.

	for(i in 0...someValue){
	}

Bam. That is, in my humble opinion, some zen. 

The basic observation is that the basic building block for any loop is a while block. While loops are available if you need fine control of the rhyme and reason to reiteration. 99% of the time, you *do not*. 

Returning to AS3, the near *constant* need to babysit for-loops through the compiler's incessant complaints about local variable redeclarations is only mitigated by FlashDevelop snippets doing the job for me. But every time I see it, I think of the scar tissue it leaves on the readability and I flinch, probably visibly.

#### 3: Generic functions for type-safe chaining and less casting 
I'm a big fan of method chaining. If a method operates on a single object, I tend to return that same object to allow further chaining. For my own component library, this can take a form somewhat like this:

	vbox.add(new Label()).setPosition(0,0).text = "Hello world";

In this case, note that I am able to immediately access the setPosition function of the Label object, even though I passed it into the vbox' add function, which you'd expect would take and return a DisplayObject. If I returned the Label as a Dynamic object, this statement would also be correct, but I'd lose type safety and code completion with it. Looking at AS3 libraries such as MinimalComps, this issue is mitigated by having components parent themselves to objects:

	var box:VBox = new VBox();
	var label:Label = new Label(box, 0, 0, "Hello world");

I strongly prefer my line.

The trick is Haxe 3 generic functions. The VBox.add signature looks like this:

	@:generic public function add<T:DisplayObject>(child:T):T
	{
		super.addChild(child);
		layout();
		return child;
	} 

What this does is generate a version of the add function for every type of child it is called with, as long as that type inherits from DisplayObject.

Since I started to play with @:generic, I've come to look for avenues such as this, where the result isn't necessarily adding *function* to the library, but actively aiding the intuitive writing of code.

### Summary

Haxe is a language that lets you tie the knot as hard as you wish. The following is completely valid code:

	function b(f){
		return { f += 5; [while(f-- > 0) if( f % 2 == 0 ) x]; };
	}

If you wish, Haxe will let you write code so maddeningly obtuse or so sickeningly uninformative you can drive a broadsword between you and team members in an instant. But with tempered care, I think it can make for the most easily readable, sophisticated code of its kind out there today. No language before it has so actively inspired me to look for *good* ways to clean up my code style without reverting (ironically) to hacks or relinquishing type safety.

If you have not tried Haxe yet, I strongly recommend you [give it a long hard look](http://www.haxe.org).  

---
Copyright © 2014 Doomsday Device Labs.


<div id="disqus_thread"></div>
<script type="text/javascript">
    /* * * CONFIGURATION VARIABLES: EDIT BEFORE PASTING INTO YOUR WEBPAGE * * */
    var disqus_shortname = 'aronning'; // required: replace example with your forum shortname

    /* * * DON'T EDIT BELOW THIS LINE * * */
    (function() {
        var dsq = document.createElement('script'); dsq.type = 'text/javascript'; dsq.async = true;
        dsq.src = '//' + disqus_shortname + '.disqus.com/embed.js';
        (document.getElementsByTagName('head')[0] || document.getElementsByTagName('body')[0]).appendChild(dsq);
    })();
</script>
<noscript>Please enable JavaScript to view the <a href="http://disqus.com/?ref_noscript">comments powered by Disqus.</a></noscript>
<a href="http://disqus.com" class="dsq-brlink">comments powered by <span class="logo-disqus">Disqus</span></a>