## Entry 4 - February 9 2014
###Flappy Bird elegy
---
Dong Nguyen's Flappy Bird has got to be one of the most fascinating stories of mobile gaming since its institutionalization. A simple little game, innocently silly, and released with *no* publicity, somehow hits the proverbial jackpot. A year after its release, a vein is struck, and its popularity skyrockets in the uncannily exponential way mobile games seemingly tend to, having currently capped the download counter on the Play store alone at 10 million downloads: reports say the real number is around 50 million, netting Nguyen sizable advertising income. The number 2 spot sits at a few hundred thousand.

Popularity is synonymous with attention, and with such _sky-shattering_ popularity comes the burning glare of gaming's Eye of Sauron, the _press_, and the un-fucking-fathomable jealousy of the internet at large. From a simple toy that drove popularity through purity of design and execution (because make no mistake, as snobbish as you want to be about it, Flappy Bird is nothing if not well executed), this was now a [copyright-infringement](http://kotaku.com/flappy-bird-is-making-50-000-a-day-off-ripped-art-1517498140) that [super-duper sucks](https://twitter.com/DanRyckert/status/431490421680656384).

Nguyen was shuttled unwillingly, believe it or not, from unassuming indie game dev community member .GEARS to being tossed into the pantheon of "successful indies" alongside titans like Notch, and into the collective gun range of Twitter, where 140 characters is nowhere near enough for proper discourse, but more than enough to call someone a hack loser without right to life. Some people are cut out for this kind of melee. Some aren't. Nguyen decided it wasn't worth it. 

At the time of writing he hasn't executed on his intent, but his public decision to take Flappy Bird off the market, if followed through, is one of the strongest messages sent to game criticism in a long time. The timing is uncanny. Phil Fish's retreat from games as a whole was fuelled by this exact reaction to the caustic spotlight, and is still fresh in memory. Also recent is a fantastic example, EA Mythic's Dungeon Keeper Mobile, of how corporate decisiveness is at the forefront of "figuring out" this market, where people are less and less keen on investing either time or currency, and the old guard of the games press can not get over their mobile game snobbishess to the point that any mobile success needs to be berated for merely deigning to make its creator honest money. EA's solution is simply that you cannot care.

You need an uncaring entity to survive this emotional acid bath, one without a public face, without someone to stick it to when things go, subjectively, wrong. Nguyen is, to my knowledge, the first successful indie developer to give "success" the finger when the shitstorm it came with became too much to handle. Compared to the combative front of Phil Fish before his retreat, Nguyen's friendly, unassuming nature colors him the only true innocent of the whole witch hunt that enveloped Flappy Bird. Where Phil Fish, in a sense, reaped what he sowed, Nguyen was simply handed a shit sandwich by the gaming community the moment he became visible. It's disgraceful and embarassing.

So I'd like to send Flappy Bird off with some love. Because I don't think it super-duper sucks at all, and the reasons it doesn't is because of how it was made.

#### 4 things I love about Flappy Bird
1. **The color.**  
  No, internet. Deciding wether to put a bird or a pig or a bat or whatever in the game is not what visual direction is finally about. Flappy Bird would have been a painfully repetitive visual experience if attention had not been paid to freshening the view on every play, with the bird and the background changing color schemes between rounds.  
2. **The audio.**  
Flappy Bird has three sound effects. Flapping, dying and surviving. The rythmic flap-flap becomes a heartbeat of desperation as you try to maintain a steady controlled rythm from pipe to pipe. The moment the rhythm is broken is sheer terror: This is where you have to find it again. A flawed rhythm in Flappy Bird is the clock ticking towards your doom. Having this crucial heartbeat punctured with the 2-tone pling of passing a pipe is both a satisfying resolution and a horrible distraction. This other rhythm can not be allowed to interfere with your own! Finally, the comical smack of failure, as your bird falls face first open-eyed in a ditch. Try again.
3. **The tutorial.**  
Flappy Bird is so simple a game, its title screen is its tutorial entire. You learn to play the game by starting it. 
4. **The fairness.**  
Flappy Bird has a reputation for being comically difficult. It is, but it is difficult in crystal fairness. The sensation of failure always comes with the immediate realization that it was your own doing. Performance is rock solid, input is super responsive. The worst you can say is that hitboxes seem bigger than they should be, but that is something you learn to work with. Flappy Bird is a hard game, but the challenge is overcome through calmness. It's zen in the way bullet hell shooters are. Tap-tapping the stick, pixel for pixel, navigating an organically evolving flower-vortex of instant death, yet you _can do it_. Flappy Bird is that kind of game. If it's difficult, it's because you are bad at it.

---
Copyright © 2014 Doomsday Device Labs.

<div id="disqus_thread"></div>
<script type="text/javascript">
    /* * * CONFIGURATION VARIABLES: EDIT BEFORE PASTING INTO YOUR WEBPAGE * * */
    var disqus_shortname = 'aronning'; // required: replace example with your forum shortname

    /* * * DON'T EDIT BELOW THIS LINE * * */
    (function() {
        var dsq = document.createElement('script'); dsq.type = 'text/javascript'; dsq.async = true;
        dsq.src = '//' + disqus_shortname + '.disqus.com/embed.js';
        (document.getElementsByTagName('head')[0] || document.getElementsByTagName('body')[0]).appendChild(dsq);
    })();
</script>
<noscript>Please enable JavaScript to view the <a href="http://disqus.com/?ref_noscript">comments powered by Disqus.</a></noscript>
<a href="http://disqus.com" class="dsq-brlink">comments powered by <span class="logo-disqus">Disqus</span></a>